hardware is the collection of physical components that makes up a computer that interacts with software to provide functionality for users.

software refers to a **collection of programs, data, and instructions that enable a computer to perform specific tasks**. It is non-physical, designed to interact with hardware and **provide functionality** for users.


[[Application software]] **allows the user to perform a task, it provides services** for the user, for example, writing a letter, viewing a website, etc.
- perform applications (apps) on a computer
- perform specific tasks using the computer's resources
- users can execute the software as and when they require
- written in higher-level languages, such as python and js.
*You need to know the generic names along with some brand names*
- a word processor
- spreadsheet
- web browser
- database
- control and measuring software
- photo editing software
- video editing software
- graphics editing software

**[[System software]]**
- set of programs to control and manage the operation of computer hardware
- provides a platform on which other software can run on
- required to allow hardware and software to run
- provides a human computer interface, HCI
- controls allocation and usage of hardware resources
- written in low-level assembly language or machine code
- runs any time the computer is on
- works in background, the user doesn't usually access it


**utility programs**
[[system software]] designed to help maintain, manage, and optimize the performance of a computer system
these programs perform specific tasks related to system maintenance and protection
- file management utilities
- disk management utilities
- backup utilities
- antivirus and security software
- compression
- system monitoring tools
- network utilities
- disk checking utlities

**Operating  System (OS)**
- manages the hardware and software resources and provides a user interface along with file management and control with peripheral devices.
**Device Drivers**
- software that allows the operating system to communicate with hardware devices, each device needs a specific driver to function properly with the OS

**Compiler**
- a program that translates high-level source code into machine code that the computer can execute
**Linkers**
- programs that combine multiple object files generated by the computer into a single executable program, linkers also resolve references between different modules or libraries





Recall
Bubble sort in pseudocode and python
```pseudocode
FOR i <- 1 TO 9
	FOR j<- 1 TO 9-i
		IF Data[j] > Data[j+1] THEN
			temp <- Data[j]
			Data[j] <- Data[j+1]
			Data[j+1] <- temp
		ENDIF
	NEXT j
NEXT i
```
```py
for i in range(0,9):
	for j in range(0,9-i):
		if Data[j] > Data[j+1]:
			temp = Data[j]
			Data[j] = Data[j+1]
			Data[j+1] = temp
```
# task 1
[[System Software]]:
- Printer Driver
- QR code reader
- Screensaver
- Anti-virus software

[[Application Software]]:
- Photo editing software
- Spreadsheet software

# task 2
[[Application software]] are software that are designed to achieve a specific task for the user. On the other hand, [[system software]] are software that manages and controls hardware resources and are there to make sure the hardware and other software can work together. [[System software]] also provides important features like an operating system for other [[application software]] to run on, they also provide utility programs such antivirus software and file managers

# task 3
We could make a Discord server with different roles and channels to make sure communication is correctly and specifically categorized, organized, and easy to access. This makes sure everyone with their respective roles can access the information such as their tasks easily. For example, an announcement channel that 
Trello for tracking progress and setting deadlines. 
Microsoft Excel to provide tools to tack donations and expenses and to calculate stuff like budgets, earnings or create charts. This is widely accessible through school accounts and has collaboration features.
Canvas for graphic design because Canvas is very beginner-friendly, it is easy to use. It also is free and has collaboration features.
To gain volunteers we can set up a Microsoft Form and distribute it to everyone, and then people that want to volunteer can fill in the role they want, what they can do and when they are available.
All these softwares can be used both on Windows and Mac, allowing anyone to use it. (why would a student use Linux for school)


Review learning
www
I can tell the difference between application and [[system software]].
ebi
remember the specific definitions for hardware, software, [[application software]], utility programs, and [[system software]].