---
draft: false
---
Examine how the poet presents power and unpredictability of nature in Wind and Storm on the Island

Ted Hughes shows the unrelenting power of nature in 'Wind' through deliberate and vivid word choice. Throughout the poem, Hughes chooses to use words such as 'crashing', 'stampeding', 'wielded', 'flexing', 'strained', 'flung', and 'bent' to clearly show readers how violent the wind is. This semantic field is reinforced by the consonance used in the fourth stanza, where the wind made a "black-back gull bent like an iron bar slowly". The consonance of 'b', 'g', and 's' in this sentence not only mimics the harshness of the wind's assault on the gull, but also slows the reading pace, allowing readers to feel the strain and pain experienced by the gull in vain. This auditory ugliness, combined with the literal meaning and vivid imagery, evokes a sense of sympathy for the gull while conveying to us the brutal and ferocious force of the wind. This exploration can also reflect Ted Hughe's personal life, where his troubled marriage with Sylvia Plath was a road of struggles with mental health and eventual suicide. The brutal power of the wind in the poem may symbolize the emotional turmoil and instability in their relationship, where some stuff seemed beyond human control. Through this use of diction and sounds, Hughes effectively presents nature's violent power.

Moreover, Hughes also presents the wind as unpredictable by using the structure and form of the poem. Upon first glance, the poem seems to have a regular structure of quatrains throughout the whole poem. But when you read it, there is a lot of enjambment and the structured quatrains now seem not so structured after all. The last sentences of each stanza always bleeds into the next stanza. The flowing of lines across stanzas resemble the wind's persistence and force, as if even the poem cannot contain it. This uniform but also not so regular structure symbolizes the deceptiveness of nature and its capacity for sudden violence. Through this clever poem structuring, Hughes effectively conveys nature's unpredictability, reminding us that nature's power can transcend human understanding, showing us our vulnerability.



'Storm on the island' also similarly presents nature as unpredictable. Heaney uses the simile of the wind being a 'tame cat turned savage' to encapsulate nature's duality: what seemed like to be 'tame' and friendly like a cat, out of nowhere, turned 'savage' and starts 'spitting'. This  reflects how nature betrays normal human expectations. Moreover, 'turned savage' is enjambed onto the next line, this slows down the pace of reading this sentence and allowing readers to dwell on it abruptness.

Similarly, 'Storm on the Island' also presents nature as powerful. Seamus Heaney also uses a semantic field and oxymoron to deliver and convey the wind's power. 'dives', 'strafes', 'salvo', 'bombarded' and 'exploding' are all words that are related to violence and more specifically, war, to invoke a sense of ferocity and violence. This is also reinforced by the oxymoron 'exploding comfortably'. The wind is able to 'explode' something, juxtaposing a contrast between the words 'exploding' and 'comfortably', breaking the islander's sense of safety. By using these literary devices, Heaney undermines any notion of safety, highlighting how nature can obliterate the human defenses both psychologically and physically. This storm and wind can also symbolize the political chaos and instability experienced by Heaney in Ireland during 'The Troubles'. Written in the mid-20th century, the poem reflects the violent conflict in Ireland. The wind, unpredictable and unrelenting, mirrors the social and political situation at that time, where everyone is harmed by fellow humans. Even far away if you are on an island far from the main land, even if you are not involved, the wind can still fling the spray from the ocean and 'spit' on your windows. Using this symbolism, Heaney tries to show how political chaos have the power to reach and affect everyone, even if they don't know what is going on.