**every nibble, 4 bits, of binary can be represented with one digit of hexadecimal.**

Hexadecimal is used because it is **easier for a human to read** rather than binary. Binary can be very long, ex. you are finding differences between two long strings.
- hexadecimal is a shorter way of representing binary, takes **less space**
- **easier** to read, write, and understand
- is easier to debug and **locate errors in data**

##### Some uses of hexadecimal
- **error code**
	- error codes are often shown as hexadecimal values
	- these numbers refer tothe memory location of the error
	- they are generated by the computer
	- the programmer needs to know how ot interpret the hexadecimal error codes
- **MAC adress**
	- *Media Access Control (MAC) address* refers to a number which uniquely identifies a device on a network
	- The MAC address refers to the network interface card (NIC) which is part of the device
	- The MAC address is rarely changed so that a particular device can always be identifies no matter where it is
- **HyperText Mark-up Language color codes**
	- HTML is used when writing and developing messages
	- it is not a programming language but a markup language
	- a markup language is used in the processing, definition, and presentation of text
	- Hex colors are used with `#FF 00 00` ex being red
- **Internet Protocol (IP) address**
	- each device is connected to a network and is given an address knwon as the IP address
	- An IPv4 address is a 32-bit number written in denary or hexadecimal form ex. 109.108.158.1 or 77.76.93.01
	- IPv4 has been improved upon by the adoption of IPv6. IPv6 address is a 128-bit number broken down into 16-bit chunks, represented by a hexadecimal number. ex. a8fb:7a88:fff0:0fff:3d21:2085:66fb:f0fa

#### conversion
to convert you can **take each binary nibble and turn that into a hex digit** then do it in order then concat them together
or you can do the division and remainder way

#### hex - 16





---


Recall
binary is a base two number system using only 1s and 0s, which can represent on and off, true or false. Computers can only read binary because of the on and off electrical signals.
each binary digit is a bit, 4 bits are a nibble, 8 bits is a byte.

## task 1
1001 1101 0001 = 9|13|1 = 9D1 in hexadecimal
1 1011 =1|11 = 1B in hex value
10 1011 1001 = 2|11|9 = 2B9 in hexadecimal

## task 2
A2 = 10|2 = 10100010
34 h =00110100
1F3 =1|15|3 = 111110011

## task 3
The normal way of representing color is through the use of the three basic colors, red, green and blue. A different combination of these three primary colors can make all the colors. So, you can represent them in a RGB value, with one slot of how much of each color, usually it ranges from 0-255. It is represented as rgb(0,0,0) but this might not be good for certain situations. since it is from 0-255 it is not efficient to represent them in binary since it will take 8 digits, so you can use hexadecimal and it will only take two digits for each specific color value, as two digits in hex can go up to 255. So in total you can use 6 digits to represent a color value in hex which looks like this `#FFFFFF`. This is used in designing webpages and is easier for programmers to write and change.

## Plenary
1. 97h = 10010111, 5Ch = 1011100
2. 10010011 = 93 in hex value, 1101 =  D in hex value

## task 4
hexadecimal can be used to represent color, error codes, and IP addresses


## task 5
0110 0011 =6|3 = 63 in hex value
11011001 =13|9 = D9 in hex value

## task 6
0110 0010 1000 1001 =6|2|8|9 = 6289 in hex
9 + 8x16 + 2x16x16 + 6x16x16x16 =25,225 

## Plenary
1. hexadecimals are a shorter way to represent binary numbers, taking less space
they are also easier to write, look at, and debug differences

1. 301 = 1 0010 1101 = 12D in hex value


Review learning
WWW: know examples of where hexadecimals are used why why
EBI: remember the exponents of 16